---
title: Language, Mind, and World - Barfield, Max Müller, and Tolkien
layout: post
comments: true
author: simon
---

>The incarnate mind, the tongue, and the tale are in our world coeval. (JRRT ‘On Fairy Stories’, 41)

>… a point that will (happily) be missed by any who have not read Barfield (few have), and probably by those who have. (JRRT, Letter 15)

In her first book, *Splintered Light*, Verlyn Flieger presents Tolkien’s Silmarillion as constructed around a mythological architecture derived from Owen Bartlett.  “Saving the Beowulf poet”, she writes in her introduction, “Barfield’s theory of the interdependence of myth and language is the primary influence on Tolkien’s mythos.” This is a big claim, and one of the purposes of the present post is to inquire into the extent to which it is justified.

An initial sceptical question immediately presents itself. Barfield wrote many books, but the one that matters to Flieger is *Poetic Diction*, which was worked up out of his Oxford DPhil thesis and published in 1928. By this date Tolkien had been composing his Silmarillion stories for over a decade. What is more, Tolkien was in Leeds between 1920 and 1925, and only on his return to Oxford did he become friends with C.S. Lewis, while Barfield later said that he and Tolkien had little significant contact without Lewis being present also. So even if we look to personal conversation rather than the printed page, Barfield is unlikely to have had any impact on Tolkien’s stories prior to 1925 at the very earliest. This leaves open the question of whether a shift in theme and content can be detected in Tolkien’s stories in the (say) decade after 1925. The present post passes over this issue, however, for, this matter is currently under investigation by my esteemed colleague, Richard Rohlin.[1]

The question of dates aside, there can be no question that Tolkien did read *Poetic Diction*, and also that on some level he approved of at least some parts of it. The second epigraph of the present post testifies as much (Tolkien is here referring to a particular sentence in *The Hobbit*)[2], as also does C.S. Lewis’ report around 1928 that Tolkien told him that Barfield’s “conception of the ancient semantic unity had modified his whole outlook” (quoted in Carpenter’s *Inklings* and *SL*, chapter 4). Nevertheless, and as we shall see, it does not seem possible to maintain that Tolkien adopted Barfield’s thinking wholesale. At most, he adopted parts of it, and in doing so adapted those parts to fit the nature and direction of his own thinking. Establishing the nature of this adaptation is the second goal of the present post.

But first, what does Barfield actually say in *Poetic Diction*? Barfield wants to know what poetry is. He is struck by the fact that archaic language seems to us inherently poetic. But he is also convinced that poetry is born from reason, and that the further one goes back in time the less conceptual thought people were capable of. He resolves this paradox by positing a three-step process of mental development: (i) ‘primitive’ humanity *perceives* the world in undivided wholes, finding abstract spiritual significance in concrete things; (ii) simply by virtue of using language (which Barfield identifies with reasoned discourse) this original perception is slowly broken down and abstract and concrete meanings are separated; (iii) the modern poet rediscovers the lost connections by *conceiving* poetic metaphors. Thus Barfield resolves his paradox by declaring ancient language a reflection of an original mythical experience of the world, but not poetry as such. Modern poetry, the product of thought, restores on the level of conceptual understanding and by way of metaphor connections that early humans experienced directly but did not understand. Poetry, for Barfield, is thus by its nature both similar to and essentially different from the original mythical experience of the world.

Barfield illustrates his theory by contrasting ancient and modern encounters with Homer. What we take to be the poetic genius of Homer, he believes, is really to do with the archaic nature of his language, which has not yet moved far from its initial expression of primitive mythical perception. In Homer we “find meaning still suffused with myth, and Nature all alive in the thinking of man”, while the “gods are never far below the surface of Homer’s language – hence its unearthly sublimity” (p. 93, Wesleyan paperback edition). But if modern humans, who think in language, discover poetry in Homer, this experience would have eluded his contemporaries: 

>The light of conscious poesy which can irradiate a modern imagination, as it comes into contact with... the Homeric hexameters, is not to be compared with such fitful aesthetic gleams as must indeed have flared up now and again amid the host of grosser pleasures preoccupying the dim self-consciousness of his own (probably half-intoxicated) audience. (pp. 105-6)[3]

By this point some inkling of the gulf the separates Barfield and Tolkien should be apparent. Can you imagine Strider on Weathertop, having chanted the tale of Tinúviel, now explaining to his hobbit audience that in ancient days this song was only fitfully appreciated by half-drunken Elves? Or, recalling that Frodo, Sam, Pippin, and Merry listened to this song in an imaginary yet still very ancient past, are we to assume that their enjoyment was less refined than ours, their appreciation less aesthetic, their experience more mired in “grosser pleasures”? Such scenarios are ludicrous. 

At the core of Barfield’s theory is the idea that history reveals the mental and spiritual progress by which humanity advances out of an original mindless animal existence. Neither in his fairy stories nor in his meditations on the primary world did Tolkien subscribe to this vision. His legendarium simply has no place for an image of the first speakers of language inhabiting a sort of unthinking mental haze. If anything, Tolkien invokes a polar opposite image of historical decline. In the closing days of the Third Age, when many Elves have already departed Middle-earth, Faramir reflects on how the mortal Elf-friends, the “Men of the West”, have dwindled into “Middle Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other things” (*Two Towers*). 

As in his secondary world, so in his understanding of the primary world, Tolkien has no time for the idea of mindless humans who perceive the world but are incapable of conceiving it. Oddly enough, this point is demonstrated by passages that Flieger quotes from Tolkien’s 1939 lecture on ‘Fairy Stories’. Note first, though, how in chapter four of *Splintered Light* Flieger (correctly) observes that, according to Barfield, the “*abstracting* of qualities from one thing in order to bestow them on another… must surely have been a late development in the history of language” (original emphasis). A few pages later Flieger quotes at length from the “critical center” of the 1939 lecture, where Tolkien discusses fantasy as an act of sub-creation.

>The incarnate mind, the tongue, and the tale are in our world coeval. The human mind, endowed with the powers of generalisation and abstraction, sees not only *green-grass*, discriminating it from other things (and finding it fair to look upon), but sees that it is *green* as well as being *grass*... The mind that thought of *light, heavy, grey, yellow, still, swift*, also conceived of magic that would make heavy things light and able to fly, turn grey lead into yellow fold, and the still rock into a swift water. If it could do the one, it could do the other; it inevitably did both. (*OFS* 41, Flieger & Anderson edition; original emphasis).

Bizarrely, Flieger cites this passage as evidence of “the impact” of Barfield’s theory on Tolkien. Yet Tolkien here denies the very point that she has just quoted Barfield making, namely, that primitive humans are incapable of linguistic abstraction and projection. For sure, Barfield is concerned with abstraction in the context of metaphor and poetry, and Tolkien in the context of adjectives and fantasy. But the underlying issue is the same, viz. whether or not the ability of the human mind to abstract and project in language is confined to modern humans or is universal. Clearly, Tolkien holds the latter – the power to engage in sub-creation (that is, to abstract and project) is “coeval” with both language and the “incarnate mind”. Nor is this disagreement trivial, for behind it stand two very different conceptions of the relationship of modern literary activity (including their own) to ancient mythology. For Barfield, ancient myth and modern poetry resemble one another, but myth belongs to a bygone period of history and in its mindlessness is essentially different from poetry.  Tolkien, by contrast, identifies mythology with fairy story and insists that such stories are as old as the human mind and language. As he says of stories of the Norse god Thor in his 1939 lecture:

>If we could go backwards in time, the fairy-story might be found to change in details, or to give way to other tales. But there would always be a ‘fairy-tale’ as long as there was any Thórr. When the fairy-tale ceased, there would be just thunder, which no human ear had yet heard. (*OFS* 44)

Far from dividing primitive and modern humans, Tolkien assumes that humans have always told stories and spoken language, and have done so in basically the same way. Indeed, the very idea of fairy stories (or mythology) as exercises in ‘sub-creation’ points to a universal image of human nature. For sub-creation is the replication of God’s creative activity on a secondary level, the idea of which is an extrapolation of the Biblical account of humanity as made in the image of God – “we make still by the law in which we are made”, as Tolkien puts it in his poem ‘Mythopoeia’. And it is not *some* humans that are made in the image of their maker, but *all* humans, everywhere and always. Far from revealing the impact of Barfield’s *Poetic Diction* on Tolkien, ‘On Fairy Stories’ demonstrates the gulf between the two men. Flieger is simply wrong to assert (as she does at the close of chapter 5) that Tolkien and Barfield held “much the same perspective on the development of humankind and human language”.

If we follow *Splintered Light* and turn from ‘On Fairy Stories’ to the fairy stories of the Silmarillion we again encounter claims about Barfield’s impact on Tolkien that cannot survive careful inspection. “The languages of Middle-earth in their development”, Flieger declares in chapter eight, “are so striking an illustration of Barfield’s thesis that one might almost think Tolkien had kept *Poetic Diction* open before him as he worked.” But much of what she seems to takes as illustration relates simply to the tree-like branching genealogy of Elvish languages, which, as she observes, mirrors the kind of genealogical branching that nineteenth-century comparative philologists traced for the Indo-European (or Aryan) family of languages. For sure, such genealogies show a differentiation of an original one into many, but this has only a superficial similarity to Barfield’s notion of the breaking up of original semantic unity into *opposite meanings* (the one concrete, the other abstract). If genealogical development in and of itself is evidence of the impact of Barfield’s thought then we should be hailing Max Müller and even Charles Darwin as Barfieldists *avant la lettre*.

In general, Flieger too often falls into the trap of identifying Barfield’s theory with a simple vision of the division of an original unity into ever more parts. But Barfield’s theory cannot be reduced to this simple model of cellular division and subdivision – it requires further that the new parts are *different in kind* from one another. Put another way, Barfield’s original semantic unity contains within itself opposite kinds of meanings, and separation generates contrasting types of meaning. Thus the tree-diagram of an original Aryan language dividing into Sanskrit, Persian, Greek, Latin, and so on is not an illustration of Barfield’s theory. Once this point is grasped the number of splinterings discussed in *Splintered Light* that count as genuine illustrations of the impact of Barfield’s theory on Tolkien declines substantially. 

Let us take a specific instance of the development of Tolkien’s languages as discussed by Flieger, the naming of the Elves. As Flieger reports (chapter 9), the Elves first call themselves *Quendi*, which means “those that speak with voices”, but the Valar, on beholding them, name them *Eldar*, “People of the Stars”. After the summons to Valinor, and the division between those who answer the call and those who refuse, modified names arise. Focusing only on those who cross the ocean, *Eldar* acquires the prefix *tar*, “high”, becoming *Tareldar*, while *Quendi* become *Calaquendi* by way of the addition of the morpheme *kal* or *cal*, “shine”. For Flieger this second modification “is a perfect example of Barfield’s unitary phrase ‘to shine’ in the process of fragmenting from a ‘definite spiritual reality’ to ‘pure human thinking’ and ‘physical light’”:

>For ‘shine’ is not a concept arbitrarily chosen and applied to the *Calaquendi*, as Müller’s ‘disease of language’ theory would propose. Rather, it represents the need to express in words a more precise and differentiated meaning, a shift of perception from a whole *Quendi*, to a part of that whole which then becomes a new concept, *Calquendi*. (Close of chapter 9)

We can work our way back to Barfield and then Tolkien by way of Max Müller, the mid-Victorian founder of Oxford comparative philology. Max Müller envisages an early moment in history when an original Aryan population was as yet undivided (was perhaps but one family), and lived a semi-pastoral existence in central Asia. These early Aryans speak a distinct but basic language, the words of which are made up of roots, which express general concepts, and at first denote only the basic things and activities of everyday life (‘Comparative Mythology’, 1856). In general, every name is founded on a root, and a new name is framed by singling out one of the qualities of that thing (say, for snow, its coldness, or its whiteness) and transforming that quality into a new noun. In this period of their history these Aryan-speakers engage in such metaphorical projection to extend their language to include the names of esoteric objects (like the heavenly bodies), collective nouns (such as ‘sky’ and ‘earth’, ‘rivers’ and ‘mountains’) and abstract nouns (such as ‘day’ and ‘night’, ‘spring’ and ‘winter’, ‘dawn’ and ‘twilight’). The sun, for example, was given the name *svar* or *sûrya*, which was formed from the root *svar* or *sval*, which meant to shine, to glitter, or to warm (*Introduction to the Science of Religion*, 1873, pp. 373-4). 

From this account of the development of language Max Müller adds two further points to derive his famous theory of mythology as a ‘disease of language’. Firstly, he argues that the transformation of a quality into a noun inevitably bestows upon the new noun a sense of personality. Secondly, he suggests that, as language changes, the original root meaning of the new name is forgotten. Mythology now arises as stories are made up to make sense of the name of this imagined personality. It is not our business to explain these two points here. What we do need to note is that Flieger’s above characterization of Max Müller theory is *wrong-headed*. When the original root meaning of an object like the sun is forgotten that name might perhaps appear arbitrary, but the choice and application of a predicate in the formation of a new noun in the first place is not arbitrary – it is bound up with and limited by the perceived qualities of the thing named. With regard to the sun, for example, Max Müller insists that “there was no possibility of naming it, except by laying hold of one of its characteristic features”, such as warmth, or light, or shining (*Introduction*, 373). As one of the distinguishing characteristics of those Elves who crossed to Valinor was that they encountered the light of the two Trees, Flieger’s assertion that the formation of *Calaquendi* is an instance of Barfield’s theory rather than of Max Müller’s seems to beg the question.

As Flieger points out, Barfield and Tolkien formed their own ideas on language very much in reaction to the theories of Max Müller (a sort of Oxford linguistic conversation). Both reject Max Müller’s core vision of the early development of language, such that an initial stock of words, which referred to ordinary everyday things and activities, is extended, by way of radical metaphor, so as to frame new words that encompass the more abstract, esoteric, and spiritual dimensions of life. Now, one thing that Tolkien certainly rejected was the notion that language begins with ordinary life and is only subsequently extended to encompass the mythological. Fairy stories are coeval with the tongue and the incarnate mind, and mythological terms must have always existed side by side with mundane words like ‘cow’ or ‘milking’. And in Tolkien’s secondary world, where the first language speakers are ethereal beings, more prone to gaze in rapt wonder at the stars than worry about where their next meal is coming from, we could even grant Max Müller’s point that early language reflects basic needs and environment and still end up with a predominantly mythological vocabulary.

The real question is whether Tolkien accepted Barfield’s radical response to Max Müller. Barfield, as we know, denied that early humans had the mental ability to abstract a quality and project it onto something else, thereby forming a new word. He therefore turned Max Müller’s theory on its head by suggesting that both abstract and concrete values were contained within the same original words. In other words, the work that Max Müller attributes to the human mind, Barfield gives to (early) language. Both Barfield and Max Müller agree that the essence of language is to be found in a mysterious – even magical – interweaving of abstract and concrete, but they differ on the source of that magic. Our question, then, is whether Tolkien located this magical dimension of language in the mind or in language. The answer, or so I suggest, is that while he accepted elements of both positions, Tolkien actually held to a third view, which located the true source of mystery in the world.

We can approach the heart of the matter by returning to *Splintered Light*. Flieger’s book as a whole focuses on two elements of Tolkien’s Silmarillion: language and light. So far we have focused on her treatment of the former, and found it wanting. However, her discussion of light, if open to criticism, is deeply insightful. First let us follow Flieger in sketching the development of this theme in Tolkien’s legendarium. Arda is first illuminated by two mighty lamps raised by the Valar (“all was lit as it were in a changeless day”). When Melkor breaks these lamps, Yavanna sings into being two light-emitting Trees; yet these shine only in Valinor, leaving Middle-earth in darkness save for the light of the stars. Melkor then brings about the destruction of the two Trees, and the Valar now make the Sun and the Moon (the light of which is derived from the Trees, but only after they are sullied by evil). Yet before their destruction, Feänor catches some of the (unsullied) light of the Trees and uses it to fashion the three Silmarils. The theft and subsequent wars over these three jewels provide the theme and background for the subsequent stories of the First Age. Actually (though Flieger does not mention this), this theme can be traced beyond the First Age. For in the last days of the Third Age Galadriel catches some light from Eärendel’s star (light, that is, of the Silmaril worn on the brow of Eärendel) and places it in a phial that she gives to Frodo, who carries it all the way to Mordor.

For Flieger, Tolkien’s treatment of light in these stories is an instance of Barfield’s theory. Of the original light she points out that what we “might be tempted to separate into levels of meaning – literal, metaphoric, symbolic – is here presented as a vital whole, a re-creation of that original participation of man with the world that Barfield postulates” (chapter 7). The progressive splintering of this original light – from lamps radiating over the whole of Arda to Trees illuminating only Valinor, to the Silmarils (and Galadriel’s phial) embodying the light in small material containers – is, for Flieger, an illustration of a technique derived from Barfield’s theory. Tolkien’s technique, she explains, is “to confer literality on what would in the primary world be called metaphor and then to illustrate the process by which the literal becomes metaphoric” (chapter 6). This is certainly the case with the destruction of the Trees and subsequent fashioning of Sun and Moon, for with these events we see the separation of concrete reality (light from the sun) and spiritual metaphor (‘seeing the light’). It is perhaps also the case with regard to the legendarium as a whole. For by the Fourth Age the spiritual light of the Valar has vanished completely from Middle-earth (save the glimmering of the morning star in the heavens), and so by this time a complete separation of an original unity may be said to have taken place (perceiving light in the physical world and spiritual illumination have fully separated).

I think there can be no question but that Flieger has identified a genuine – and central – instance of Tolkien employing a technique that has affinity with Barfield’s theory of the development of language. Nevertheless, the fit is not exact because the *splintering* of the original light (from lamps to Trees to Silmarils to phial) does not usually give rise to opposing concrete and spiritual meanings, as Barfield’s theory requires. Rather, in each of these splinterings what remains is still a concrete embodiment of the spiritual. Reduction and diminution is not the same as separation of concrete and metaphorical (just as the branching of languages – real or Elvish – does not illustrate the dividing of one source into two contrasting types). More to the point, Flieger, I suspect, was so busy trying to relate splinters of light to Barfield’s theory (and so, more often than not, trying to fit square pegs into round holes) that she failed to register the true significance of these splinters. What Tolkien presents to us in the Silmarillion are a series of mysterious objects that, combining spiritual and concrete values, are just the kind of mysterious objects named in Barfield’s original language. But if we stop fussing over whether and how the *names* of these objects divide into contrasting forms, we are free to register what the *objects* themselves really are, namely: instances of incarnation.

Like Bilbo gazing upon the dragon hoard, we are apt to become enchanted by the sensuous richness of Tolkien’s fairy stories. In the first pages of the published *Silmarillion*, for example, we read that the world was first made by music, then appeared as a vision, yet only came into being with the speaking of a word; and there is surely significance in the semblance of a hierarchy in this sequence of appearance. Yet on reading but a little further we discover that the newly created world only *came alive* when some of the Ainur descend into it, “so that they are its life and it is theirs. And therefore they are named the Valar, the Powers of the World” (*Silmarillion*). Just as the light of the Valar is incarnated in the Silmarils, so the Valar themselves are incarnate in the world. Here is the real source of the spell that Middle-earth casts upon us: it is *because* these spiritual powers are incarnate that the world of Arda is alive, enchanting, and purposeful. Of course, not all power incarnate in Middle-earth is good: Sauron puts much of his own power into his Ring, the most famous of Middle-earth incarnations. There is more than one power at work (“Bilbo was *meant* to find the Ring, and *not* by its maker…”). But if the powers embodied in Arda and its artefacts are complex, the important point is simply that the physical world (as a whole) and some of the objects in it have a magical quality because they embody spiritual powers.

Incarnation, for Tolkien, is a profound truth of both primary and secondary worlds. For Tolkien held to such teachings of the Catholic Church as the doctrine that Jesus Christ was spirit made flesh, or that in Holy Communion the bread and the wine become the body and blood of Christ, or that a human being is an incarnate soul. Tolkien’s secondary world thus reflects what he took to be his primary world. As he wrote to Milton Waldman: “I believe that legends and myths are largely made of ‘truth,’ and indeed present aspects of it that can only be received in this mode; and long ago certain truths and modes of this kind were discovered and must always reappear” (Letter 131). Incarnation is surely just one such “truth”. Now the particular instance of incarnation that is at the heart of Christianity clearly has no place in Arda. But the very fabric of this secondary world is woven out of other instances of the general truth of the incarnation of spiritual power within material objects.

We can now specify the vast differences between Barfield and Tolkien in order to delineate and explain the overlap in their thinking. On the one hand we have Barfield, who is entirely caught up in the relationship between perception, language, and conception – he never seeks to break out of human experience to discover something about the world itself. On the other hand we have Tolkien, who starts from some profound convictions about the nature of reality, one of which (that humans are incarnate souls) is fundamentally incompatible with Barfield’s notion of the development of human consciousness out of an original mindlessness. Thus far the divergence is total. Yet Barfield’s idea of the words of an original language (expressing original perceptions) that does not separate abstract and concrete meanings, while in his thinking a correlate of human mindlessness, complements Tolkien’s idea that the world is inhabited by incarnate powers. For a (mindful) human wittingly encountering instances of incarnation perceives an object that is at once abstract and concrete and, in describing it in language, is likely to hit upon Barfield’s “original semantic unity”.  This overlap does not arise because Tolkien accepts Barfield’s wider arguments in *Poetic Diction*, but because Tolkien’s religious convictions point to a reality that for Barfield exists only in ‘primitive’ perception and the ideas of modern poetry.

Flieger’s view that Tolkien subscribed to Barfield’s theory of language can be abandoned without regret. It would be more near the truth to say that the mystery that Barfield located in primitive language Tolkien located in the world. The mysterious role of the mind in the making of language cannot, all the same, be dismissed. In that central passage of ‘On Fairy Stories’ from which we have already quoted, Tolkien describes our mental ability to project adjectives at will (that is, to give to objects different qualities in our imagination) as a kind of “magic”, and equates it with the most potent spells and incantations of Faërie. Yet the linguistic spells woven by incarnate minds can never move beyond the level of appearances; even the enchanted songs and stories of the Elves only create the illusion of reality, they do not bring reality into being. In making up a story we project abstract qualities *onto* different imaginary objects. In making the primary world, by contrast, God breathed spiritual power *into* physical objects. Our adjectives imitate divine incarnation; they are the basic tool of our acts of sub-creation, our performance on a secondary level of God’s activity in creating us and the primary world that we inhabit. Tolkien’s ideas of language and of fantasy are thus reflections of his idea of incarnation.

>The incarnate mind, the tongue, and the tale are in our world coeval.

So that is the answer to all the riddles!

***

**Footnotes**

 1. By way of premature and uninformed conjecture: I would suggest that the clearest instance of Tolkien’s deployment of Barfield’s theory is not even mentioned in *Splintered Light*. This is the story of the bending of the “straight road” between Middle-earth and Valinor after the destruction of Númenor at the end of the Second Age. Henceforth, what the notion of ‘the further shore’ becomes metaphorical, while actual sailing across the western ocean leads one, not to the land of Faërie but to America (an altogether different proposition). That Flieger does not mention this part of Tolkien’s legendarium is understandable, because it only became properly known with the publication of volumes 5 and 9 of the *HoME* series, which appeared after the first publication of *Splintered Light*. But the fit in this case is so exact (and so much neater than anything discussed by Flieger) that it is very tempting to offer the following scenario: Tolkien’s conception of the nature and history of the original light of Arda predated any encounter with the thought of Barfield, but on reading Barfield around 1928 Tolkien was so struck by certain affinities between Barfield’s theory and his own exercise in sub-creation that in the 1930s, with his account of the destruction of Númenor, he really did self-consciously project Barfield’s theory of the division of original semantic unity into concrete and metaphorical meanings on to his legendarium.
 
 2. “There are no words left to express his staggerment, since Men changed the language that they learned of elves in the days when all the world was wonderful… [Bilbo’s] heart was filled and pierced with enchantment…” (*The Hobbit*, ‘Inside Information’). Note the suggestion that *the world* was once different (a notion quite alien to the linguistic philosophy of Barfield).
 
 3. Cf. Tolkien’s much more measured and balanced reflections on reading Homeric Greeks (and also Anglo-Saxon) in ‘A Secret Vice’ (*M&C* 206): “we are in a position to see some things better at a distance, others more dimly.”

